---
title: Arcane Magic
description: How Magic Works for Magic-Users
tableOfContents: true

sidebar:
  order: 2
---

While spells are somewhat standardized effects used repeatedly by many Magic-Users, each spellcaster’s understanding and
recording of a spell is highly individualized. Magic-Users must rely on spellbooks because human minds cannot naturally
contain magical knowledge. However, spell notation is not a set formula; it varies wildly from one user to another. For
instance, the spell "Magic Missile" might appear in the spellbooks of a hundred different Magic-Users, yet each version
would be unique in style and content. Elves do not use a spellbook but instead have an inate spellcasting ability.

### Access & Preparation

Each Magic-User begins with a spellbook containing the Read Magic spell plus 3 randomly chosen 1st-level spells. With
each new level, they can add one additional spell, chosen at random, though it still requires standard time for research
or transcription.

To prepare spells, a Magic-User must rest for 6 continuous hours. After resting, they study their spellbook for a
duration that corresponds to the highest level spell they wish to prepare. This preparation process (aka memorization),
imprints the spells temporarily in the Magic-User’s mind. Once a spell is cast, it fades from memory and must be
re-prepared to use again. However, the Magic-User can prepare the same spell multiple times if desired, up to the limits
set by their spell chart.

Prepared spells cannot be simply dismissed; they must be cast to free up space in the mind. Additionally, reversed
versions of spells, are treated as separate spells, requiring distinct research, transcription, and preparation.
Magic-Users can safely prepare spells only once every 24 hours, as over-preparation strains the mind.

### Spell Scrolls

Scrolls allow a Magic-User to cast spells without memorization, even if the spell is beyond their usual ability. The
user must first cast Read Magic to understand the scroll, but once understood, any spell on it can be cast. Scrolls may
contain multiple spells, but each spell can only be cast once, erasing it from the scroll. To cast from a scroll, the
Magic-User must hold it with both hands, and in combat, it requires a full action. The effects of the spell depend on
the level of the Magic-User casting it, not the one who created the scroll.

### Writing a Scroll

Any Magic-User can create a spell scroll for any spell in his spellbook. The process costs 50 sp per day. Even though
the scroll is essentially a “one-use” formula for a spell, each must still be individually researched and crafted, and
not mass-produced. Indeed, making a copy of a spell scroll will not imbue the copy with magical energy, or at the GM’s
discretion, perhaps making the copy would dissipate all magical energy from the original as well!

### Researching a Spell

...

### Creating a Potion

Spells which affect a person can, be made into liquid form so that the imbiber gains the benefit of the spell. The maker
of the potion must be able to cast the spell being turned into a potion. If a Cleric assists the Magic- User, a potion
capturing the essence of any of the healing spells (Cure Wounds or Cure Disease) can be made, though the Cleric must be
of high enough level to cast the spell in question. The process to make a potion costs 50 sp per day.

### Time of Magical Activities

...

### Casting Spells

Casting spells requires Magic-Users to use both hands (or a staff/wand) and to freely recite the spell’s incantation.
Any restrictions on movement or speech, like being bound or Silenced, prevent casting. Spellcasting is always obvious
and cannot be hidden. Magic-Users also cannot cast spells if encumbered beyond a Light load. Elves cannot cast spells if
they are more than Heavily encumbered.
